---
Title: Vim cheat sheet
Author: SergeM
Date: 2018-05-31 07:10:00
Slug: vim
aliases: [/vim.html]
Tags: [ vim,cheatsheet,keyboard shortcuts]
---


## Some frequently used commands in Vim

### File explorer 
    :Explore - opens the file explorer window. 
    :E - the same

### Visual commands

    > - shift right
    < - shift left
    y - yank (copy) marked text
    d - delete marked text
    ~ - switch case

### Cut and Paste

    yy - yank (copy) a line
    2yy - yank 2 lines
    yw - yank word
    y$ - yank to end of line
    p - put (paste) the clipboard after cursor
    P - put (paste) before cursor
    dd - delete (cut) a line
    dw - delete (cut) the current word
    x - delete (cut) current character


### Search/Replace

    /pattern - search for pattern
    ?pattern - search backward for pattern
    n - repeat search in same direction
    N - repeat search in opposite direction
    :%s/old/new/g - replace all old with new throughout file
    :%s/old/new/gc - replace all old with new throughout file with confirmations


### Identation settings
Create the file
```
vim ~/.vim/vimrc
```
Add the configuration:
```
filetype plugin indent on
set tabstop=4
set shiftwidth=4
set expandtab
```
Restart vim.


You can replace all the tabs with spaces in the entire file with
```
:%retab
```

### Working with multiple files

    :e filename - Edit a file in a new buffer
    :bnext (or :bn) - go to next buffer
    :bprev (of :bp) - go to previous buffer
    :bd - delete a buffer (close a file)
    :sp filename - Open a file in a new buffer and split window
    ctrl+ws - Split windows
    ctrl+ww - switch between windows
    ctrl+wq - Quit a window
    ctrl+wv - Split windows vertically
    ctrl+wj - switch wo the bottom window
    ctrl+wk - switch wo the top window
    

### Paste without reformatting 

Vim provides the 'paste' option to aid in pasting text unmodified from other applications. You can set it manually like:
```
:set paste
```
paste, then

```
:set nopaste
```


### Upper/lower case transformation

`~` - Toggle case of the character under the cursor, or all visually-selected characters. 

`3~` Toggle case of the next three characters. 

`g~3w` Toggle case of the next three words. 

`g~iw` Toggle case of the current word (inner word – cursor anywhere in word). 

`g~$` Toggle case of all characters to end of line. 

`g~~` Toggle case of the current line (same as V~). 

The above uses `~` to toggle case. In each example, you can replace `~` with `u` to convert to lowercase, or with `U` to convert to uppercase. For example:

`U` Uppercase the visually-selected text. 
    First press `v` or `V` then move to select text. 
    If you don't select text, pressing `U` will undo all changes to the current line. 

`gUU`
    Change the current line to uppercase (same as VU). 

`gUiw`
    Change current word to uppercase. 

`u`
    Lowercase the visually-selected text. 
    If you don't select text, pressing u will undo the last change. 

`guu`
    Change the current line to lowercase (same as Vu). 



## Other versions:
* [vimCheatSheet](https://www.fprintf.net/vimCheatSheet.html)
* [another vim cheat scheet](https://vim.rtorr.com/)


## My .vimrc (or ~/.vim/vimrc)
```
filetype plugin indent on
set tabstop=4
set shiftwidth=4
set expandtab
```
